# Natural Language System

## Definitions

### Lexical semantics

- **Synonymy**: same meaning (in all/nearly all situations), e.g. water/H2O, big/large.
- **Antonyms**: opposite meaning, e.g. dark/light, short/long.
- **Homonymy**: same word but different meaning
  - bank, financial institution or sloping land.
  - bat, club for hitting a ball or nocturnal flying mammal.
- **Homophones**: sound the same but different meaning, e.g. write/right, piece/peace, their/there.
- **Polysemy**: related meaning.
  - the bank was constructed in 1875 out of local red brick. Sense 1: The building belonging to a financial institution”
  - I withdrew the money from the bank. Sense 2: A financial institution
  - building/organization, tree/fruit.
- **Hyponymy and hypernymy**

### Open class words

[original doc](https://online.manchester.ac.uk/bbcswebdav/pid-12310643-dt-content-rid-67013747_1/courses/I3132-COMP-34412-1201-2SE-001971/glossary%281%29.pdf), [more material](https://developers.google.com/tech-writing/one/just-enough-grammar).

- **noun**: denotes person or thing, e.g. dog, house, mind, English.
- **verb**: denotes state, action, or event, e.g. live, lives, living, lived, know, think, catch.
- **adjective**: describes a property with noun, e.g. old, green.
- **adverb**: describes a property with verb, e.g. quickly, suddenly.

### Closed class words

- **pronoun**: denotes a something or person that we talk about recently, e.g. it, she, her, he, him.
- **preposition**: provides more information about a noun or a verb by linking it to some other entity, e.g. on, with, at. 
- **auxiliary**: helps provide information about when an event happened, e.g. am, will, might.
- **determiner**: nouns and adjectives provide you with a description, e.g. a, the, many, all.

### Features

- **person**: 1st, 2nd, 3rd.
- **number**: singular or plural, e.g. -s, -es.
- **tense**: used in combination with auxiliary, e.g. -ed, -ing.
- **aspect**: tells you how the event was related to the time point named by the tense.
- **voice**: active, passive.



